---
layout: post
title: "Hardening Debian"
categories: Guides
tags: 
---

## Introduction
This will be a post alive that will have updates always, if I can and there is some news to add, the idea is to know the tools, configurations methodology and good practices to be as safe as possible working in our laptop or exposing a service.

The guide is thought to be applied in Debian or equivalent!


## Hardening a Server
### Firewall rules & Packet Filtering
[Still not]
### Services 
#### 1. SSH
[REFS]
[ed25519](https://medium.com/risan/upgrade-your-ssh-key-to-ed25519-c6e8d60d3c54)


Just as a mention I will numerate the steps to do and maybe in other moment I will dive about how
1. Disable access as a root
2. Disable access using credentials and just allow using a keyfile
3. Use Ed25519 for encrypt the key and use a strong password
`ssh-keygen -o -a 100 -t ed25519 -f ~/.ssh/id_ed25519 -C "john@example.com"`

#### 2. fail2ban
[REFS]
[fail2ban](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-fail2ban-works-to-protect-services-on-a-linux-server)
Is a software that monitoring logs is able to execute actions. Is easily apply because have several templates for common services as **ssh**, apache, etc.... but yuo could even custom. This tool could send you a email as a alert create a dynamic firewall rule to block permanent o temporally some ip or port.

Basically we have to work with two file after install fail2ban
`sudo apt install fail2ban`
**/etc/fail2ban/fail2ban.conf**
```text
In this file we have general configuration of the application as pidfile, logtarget even in you want to save the information monitored in a database (sqlite3)
```
**/etc/fail2ban/jail.config**
```text
In this file you define the max_retry value, ban_time, the e-mail to alert in case you want and the most important, the JAIL's. The JAILs are the software that fail2ban is monitoring, the most common used is for ssh but are defined templates to work with:
- ssh
- selinux-ssh
- HTTP servers 
	- Apache-auth, apache-overflow, apache-modsecurity, apache.shellshock...
	- nginx
	- php url opened
	- drupal
- FTP
- DNS Server
- BBDD
	- mysql
	- mongo db
- xinetd
```

At the moment I'm not going to define policies now even a implementation, but if you have a server exposed think about investigate more about this.

## Hardening your laptop
Yor laptop or any computer you use to work daily you should think about
### Installation Fully Encrypted File System
This point is probably the cheaper and the most hard to do it right so I'm going to save write it now and I will in the future trying to explain everything I know about.
### Firewall or Packet filtering
To forbid all the outbound traffic except the traffic generated by your own VPN

### Sandbox
All the time we are working with file received through e-mail, webservers o even a telegram conversation. Is a good practice untrust of everything before to open it, maybe checking the content using https://www.virustotal.com but sometimes if the attack comes from a webpages (XXE) when you get the problem is usually too late to solve. So my propose is trying to sandbox the application that due to the daily use are more or less vulnerable to be attacked.
#### firejail
- Firefox
- Okular
- MegaSync
- Telegram Desktop
- keepass?
- anydesk
- virtualbox/vmware?

Basically to apply the sandbox to the applications just you need go to _/usr/share/applications/_ and modify the .desktop of the application we want to sandbox just adding:
```text
[Desktop Entry]
Version=1.0
Type=Application
Terminal=false
Exec=firejail /opt/firefox/firefox
Name=firefox
```
or for AppImage
```text
#!/usr/bin/env xdg-open
[Desktop Entry]
Version=1.0
Type=Application
Terminal=false
Exec=/home/LT075/Downloads/KeePassXC-2.6.6-x86_64.AppImage
Name=keepass
Comment=
Icon=

```
Should we create custom rules in firejail? Sure but that'll the next iteration.


#### Configuration for external media
At the begining Linux don't execute any code after insert a device but we should try to secure this but this will be fill in the future.

## Hardening the most
#### Monitoring Logs with logcheck
[REFs]
[logcheck](http://somebooks.es/recibir-informes-sobre-sucesos-de-ubuntu-server-18-04-lts-con-logcheck/)
This program monitors logs every hour (by default) and send to the administrator e-mail the unusuals logs messages detected.


#### Monitoring activity in Real Time
We can use top or **htop** to check the process running, the free and busy resources and even change the process priority.
And could be interesting know about `renice` command to rise o go down the cpu priority for the processes or usign in htop f7 & f8 to modify the nice value
'u' to inspect the process by user

#### Detecting change
One you have a system (in production or not) installed and configured most system files should be relatively static until an upgrade.
At first we can just cehck the whole packages installed with the repositories
`dpkg --verify`
```text
-V, --verify [package-name...]
          Verifies  the integrity of package-name or all packages if omit‐
          ted, by comparing information from the installed paths with  the
          database metadata.
```
dpkg relies on the checksums stored in /var/lib/dpkg/info/package.md5sums so an attacker could modify this file to avoid this check or even compromise the package in your Debian mirror. 
To create a new md5sum file for some modifications to the applications (configurations files) you can launch (For ssh as example):
`/etc/systemd/system/ssh.service override`

To protect correctly against this kind of attack the best option is use an APT digital signature verification system.

Monitoring file with 
**AIDE**
[Manual](https://linux.die.net/man/5/aide.conf)
Advance Intrusion Detection Environment check file integrity save that information in a database (/var/lib/aide/aide.db) saving there information as fingerprints, permissions, timestamps and so on.

Install and initialize
```
sudo apt install aide
#init database
aideinit
# This will execute daily /etc/cron/.daily/aide script to check if there is a change, these will be register in /var/log/aide/*.log and will send to the administrator e-mail defined
```

And attacker that compromise a machine could modify or even delete the local data base, for that is important store the database file on a read-only storage media.

**Tripwire**
This software add the possibility to sign the configuration files so the attacker cannot make it point to a different versions of the reference database

**Samhain**
Similar options but additional functionalities to detect rootkits. This can be launch in a whole network and recolect information in a central server

To know more about detect rootkits investigate about:
- checksecurity
- chkrootkit & rkhunter

## Nebula
**Instalation**
https://snapcraft.io/install/nebula/debian

### Hardening the kernel for Secure Boot - Matthew Garrett, Nebula
**https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fDzAVksopYw**
-  kexec: kernel execution, just signed modules are able to be execute in the kernel
- capabilities: NOP


## What if you are responsible of a machine you didn't configure?
When you have control over a new machine that you didn't deploy but it's in production already we should take some precautions before say formally that we are responsible about the security of this system. This steps are not based in any recommendation program just based on my experience and common sense:
#### Check processes running
To see all process running in a tree format
`ps -faux`

#### Scan sockets
The min rate is high but working in localhost we shoul'd have problem with be banned. If something goes wrong just decrease de 5000 value.

---
I generate a reverse shell from localhost to localhsot to inspect some proess in particular with` nc -nlvp 8888` & `bash -c "bash -i >& /dev/tcp/127.0.0.1/8888 0>&1"`

---
```
>sudo nmap -sS --min-rate 5000 -Pn -n -p- 127.0.0.1 

>sudo nmap -sF --min-rate 5000 -Pn -n -p- 127.0.0.1 

>sudo nmap -sU --min-rate 5000 -Pn -n -p- 127.0.0.1 
```
And having that as reference
```text
ss -tulpn
Netid                    State                     Recv-Q                    Send-Q                                        Local Address:Port                                          Peer Address:Port
udp                      UNCONN                    0                         0                                                   0.0.0.0:46778                                              0.0.0.0:*
tcp                      LISTEN                    0                         128                                               127.0.0.1:2015                                               0.0.0.0:*                                                             
```
or to see the active connections:
```text
ss -tulpan
tcp                 ESTAB                    0                    0                                      127.0.0.1:8888                                      127.0.0.1:47140                users:(("nc",pid=17529,fd=4))   

tcp                 ESTAB                    0                    0                                      127.0.0.1:47140                                     127.0.0.1:8888                 users:(("bash",pid=17531,fd=2),("bash",pid=17531,fd=1),("bash",pid=17531,fd=0))               

```
Where:
- t: tcp ports
- u: udp ports
- -l: listening
- p: Get user and pid of the process
- n: show port in numerical format
- a: Show active connections

We need to remember that a revershell just appear in active connections just inspect them are fundamental as well.
#### Scan Processes
Whit this last step we have a relation between a pid and a process, let's annalyze the pid related to the process that return us a revershell
```text
users:(("bash",pid=17531,fd=2),("bash",pid=17531,fd=1),("bash",pid=17531,fd=0))
```
```text
➜  ~ lsof -i 4 -a -p 17531
COMMAND   PID USER   FD   TYPE DEVICE SIZE/OFF NODE NAME
bash    17531 deby    0u  IPv4 409634      0t0  TCP localhost:47140->localhost:8888 (ESTABLISHED)
bash    17531 deby    1u  IPv4 409634      0t0  TCP localhost:47140->localhost:8888 (ESTABLISHED)
bash    17531 deby    2u  IPv4 409634      0t0  TCP localhost:47140->localhost:8888 (ESTABLISHED)
```
or you could use fuser to go from the port to the proccess
```text
fuser 47140/tcp
	47140/tcp:           17531

## Now just find the file executed
➜ ls -l /proc/17531/exe 
	lrwxrwxrwx 1 deby deby 0 sep  6 09:43 /proc/17531/exe -> /usr/bin/bash
```

With this you can know everything about the process and even annalyze the traffic of the process filtering through the port.
`sudo tcpdump -i lo -port 8888`


## Backups
#### rsync
We can use rsync in local just as:
`sudo rsync -av --delete /etc /home /usr/local /media/ImaginaryDisk/backup`
```text
-av archive mode + verbose
--delete for deleting in the backup the files deleted in the original folders
```
But the true powerfull is in the remote backups, specially tunneling through ssh
`sudo rsync -av --delete --rsh=ssh /etc /home /usr/local remote-sys:/backup`

How should we recover a backup made with rsync?